Add 481 release notes (#28894)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-481.md

* Improve compatibility of file system exchange with Azure containers that have hierarchical namespaces enabled. ({issue}`29042`)
* Improve performance of queries with simple `AND` and `OR` predicates that have highly selective terms. ({issue}`24336`)
* Fix query failures and transaction errors caused by race conditions when dynamic catalogs are dropped concurrently with `system.jdbc` or `system.metadata` queries. ({issue}`28017`)
* Fix incorrect results when using {func}`json_parse` or `JSON` type literals on documents containing numbers with more than 16 significant digits in the decimal portion. ({issue}`28867`)
* Fix failure when executing table procedures on tables with uppercase column names. ({issue}`28970`)
* Fix failure when executing `ALTER TABLE EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` with `OR` predicates on partitioned `timestamp with time zone` columns. ({issue}`27136`)
* Fix incorrect freshness check for materialized views whose definition contains non-deterministic functions. ({issue}`28682`)
* Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF` clauses. ({issue}`29077`)

> * Reduce excessive memory usage caused by suboptimal join ordering for queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — "Reduce" bullet placed among the Fixes**

This bullet's verb is "Reduce", which puts it in the improvements group. It currently sits at the end of the section after a run of `Fix` bullets (L23-28). Suggest moving it to immediately after L22, alongside the other improvement bullets in the section.

## JDBC driver

* Add support for the `variant` type. ({issue}`29046`)
* Add support for transparent OAuth2 token refresh when using the JDBC `accessToken`
  connection property against a server configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.refresh-tokens=true`.
  Previously, such connections failed with `401 Unauthorized` once the embedded
  access token expired. ({issue}`29264`)
* Fix failure when calling `setBigDecimal()` with a `BigDecimal` value whose
  `toString()` representation uses scientific notation, such as `0E-10`. ({issue}`23523`)

## CLI

* Add support for the `variant` type. ({issue}`29046`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for reading all ClickHouse `DECIMAL` columns. ({issue}`28873`)

## Delta Lake connector

* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.

>   `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See

Reviewer: **"now" usage — regression here; also still present at Iceberg L86 and Lakehouse L110**

This line was correctly "applies only" in the previous revision and got reverted to "now applies only". The same wording change is also still needed at the Iceberg (L86) and Lakehouse (L110) copies of the legacy-storage-removal bullet — Hive (L68) is the only one that currently reads "applies only".

```suggestion
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` applies only to HDFS. See
```

  Older CLI versions will render the value as JSON unless updated. ({issue}`24538`)
* Add support for reading and writing `timestamp(9)` and
  `timestamp(9) with time zone` in Iceberg v3 tables. ({issue}`27835`)
* Add support for Azure vended credentials in Iceberg REST catalog. ({issue}`23238`)
* Add support for specifying HTTP headers in REST catalog. ({issue}`24236`)
* Add support for execution metrics while running the `add_files` and `add_files_from_table`
  procedures. ({issue}`28996`)
* Add support for execution metrics while running the `optimize` procedure. ({issue}`28992`)
* Add more columns to `$files` system table. ({issue}`29044`)
* Add `added_snapshot_id` column to `$files` system table. ({issue}`28911`)
* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)
* Add support for refreshable vended credentials for the Iceberg REST catalog (S3, GCS, Azure). ({issue}`28998`)
* Reduce memory fragmentation and improve memory tracking for S3 file write

>   operations. ({issue}`28488`)

Reviewer: **Partial cleanup — also at Lakehouse L113-114**

Delta Lake L57 and Hive L73 were simplified to "Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3." This Iceberg copy and the Lakehouse copy at L113-114 still carry the longer "memory fragmentation … memory tracking" wording. Same rewrite applies to both.

```suggestion
* Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3. ({issue}`28488`)
```

# Release 481 (dd MMM 2026)

## General

* Add support for casting `boolean` to `number`. ({issue}`28879`)
* Add support for the `number` type in Python UDFs. ({issue}`28921`)
* Add support for casting between `number` and `json`. ({issue}`28394`)
* Improve performance of {ref}`json_value <json-value>` and {ref}`json_table <json-table>` by evaluating `ON EMPTY` and `ON ERROR` clauses lazily. ({issue}`28969`)
* Add support for `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with inline queries, allowing direct description
  of query results without requiring a `PREPARE` statement. For example,
  `DESCRIBE OUTPUT (SELECT * FROM nation)`. ({issue}`28002`)
* Add support for the `NEAREST` clause for approximate matches in joins. ({issue}`21759`)
* Add support for binding parameters in `WITH SESSION`, `SET SESSION`, and `CALL` statements. ({issue}`29053`)
* Add support for persisting external authentication tokens to disk (in `~/.trino/`), allowing reuse across separate JDBC client processes. Set `externalAuthenticationTokenCache=SYSTEM` to enable. ({issue}`28783`)

> * Add CPU and scheduled time usage timeseries to query JSON page. ({issue}`29016`)

Reviewer 2: I would drop this. Does not feel like end-user feature. Rather a profiling/debugging tool for engineers.
cc: @lukasz-stec

> * Add CPU and scheduled time usage timeseries to query JSON page. ({issue}`29016`)

Reviewer 2: also claude thinks timeseries should be time series. IDK reallly

> * Add CPU and scheduled time usage timeseries to query JSON page. ({issue}`29016`)

Reviewer: **Internal terminology — "query JSON page"**

"query JSON page" is an internal-flavoured term for the Web UI's query-detail JSON view. PR #29016 surfaces the timeseries on `OperatorStats`, which is visible in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE` output, the Web UI, and the event listener — the canonical engine term is "operator metrics".

```suggestion
* Add CPU and scheduled time usage timeseries to operator metrics. ({issue}`29016`)
```

* Include connector split source metrics in 
  `io.trino.spi.eventlistener.QueryInputMetadata#connectorMetrics`. ({issue}`28870`)
* Replace the Esri geometry library with JTS to improve interoperability with the broader spatial ecosystem. ({issue}`27881`)
* {{breaking}} Reject WKT input that does not conform to OGC standards. Some inputs that were silently accepted before will now fail. ({issue}`27881`)
* Improve compatibility of file system exchange with Azure containers that have hierarchical namespaces enabled. ({issue}`29042`)
* Improve performance of queries with simple `AND` and `OR` predicates that have highly selective terms. ({issue}`24336`)
* {{breaking}} Change {func}`ST_Union` to return an empty geometry collection instead of `NULL` for empty inputs. ({issue}`27881`)

> * {{breaking}} Stop inserting vertices at intersection points for point-on-line unions in {func}`ST_Union`. ({issue}`27881`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — ST_Union behaviour-change bullets sit after the Improves**

Within a section the canonical order is Add → Behaviour change → Improve → Fix; the `{{breaking}}` marker is orthogonal. L22-23 are behaviour changes (`Change ST_Union to return …` and `Stop inserting vertices …`) but currently sit after L20-21 (the two Improves), separating them from L18-19 (the other behaviour-change bullets).

Suggest moving L22 and L23 to immediately follow L19, so all four behaviour-change bullets are grouped together (L18, L19, L22, L23) before the Improves.

* Fix query failures and transaction errors caused by race conditions when dynamic catalogs are dropped concurrently with `system.jdbc` or `system.metadata` queries. ({issue}`28017`)
* Fix incorrect results when using {func}`json_parse` or `JSON` type literals on documents containing numbers with more than 16 significant digits in the decimal portion. ({issue}`28867`)
* Fix failure when executing table procedures on tables with uppercase column names. ({issue}`28970`)
* Fix failure when executing `ALTER TABLE EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` with `OR` predicates on partitioned `timestamp with time zone` columns. ({issue}`27136`)
* Fix incorrect freshness check for materialized views whose definition contains non-deterministic functions. ({issue}`28682`)
* Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF` clauses. ({issue}`29077`)

> * Reduce excessive memory usage caused by suboptimal join ordering for queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — "Reduce" bullet placed among the Fixes**

This bullet's verb is "Reduce", which puts it in the Improvements group. It currently sits at the end of the section after a run of `Fix` bullets (L24-29). Suggest moving it to immediately after L21, alongside the other improvement bullets in the section.

## JDBC driver

* Add support for the `variant` type. ({issue}`29046`)

> * Fix failure when the server is configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.refresh-tokens=true`. ({issue}`29264`)

Reviewer: **Symptom and trigger unclear; verb may be wrong**

PR #29264 ("Support transparent OAuth2 token refresh when using the accessToken JDBC property") adds a feature: JDBC clients using the `accessToken` connection property previously failed with `401 Unauthorized` once the embedded short-lived access token expired (no recovery short of reconnecting); the driver now refreshes transparently. The current bullet leads with the server config and doesn't say what the user observed before or after.

```suggestion
* Add support for transparent OAuth2 token refresh when using the JDBC `accessToken` connection property against a server configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.refresh-tokens=true`. Previously, such connections failed with `401 Unauthorized` once the embedded access token expired. ({issue}`29264`)
```

> * Fix failure when the server is configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.refresh-tokens=true`. ({issue}`29264`)

Reviewer: **Symptom and trigger unclear; verb may be wrong**

PR #29264 ("Support transparent OAuth2 token refresh when using the accessToken JDBC property") adds a feature: JDBC clients using the `accessToken` connection property previously failed with `401 Unauthorized` once the embedded short-lived access token expired (no recovery short of reconnecting); the driver now refreshes transparently. The current bullet leads with the server config and doesn't say what the user observed before or after.

```suggestion
* Add support for transparent OAuth2 token refresh when using the JDBC `accessToken` connection property against a server configured with `http-server.authentication.oauth2.refresh-tokens=true`. Previously, such connections failed with `401 Unauthorized` once the embedded access token expired. ({issue}`29264`)
```

## CLI

* Add support for the `variant` type. ({issue}`29046`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for reading all ClickHouse `DECIMAL` columns. ({issue}`28873`)

## Delta Lake connector

> * {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
>   Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
>   systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
>   `fs.hadoop.enabled` applies only to HDFS. See
>   [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See
  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)
```

* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)
* Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3. ({issue}`28488`)
* Reduce query planning time by reading metadata and protocol information from Delta checksum files.
  This optimization can be disabled by setting the `delta.load-metadata-from-checksum-file` configuration property or
  `load_metadata_from_checksum_file` session property to `false`. ({issue}`28381`)
* Fix `DELETE` deleting incorrect rows on Delta Lake tables backed by Parquet files with column indexes, particularly when the table was written by Apache Spark. ({issue}`28885`)

## Hive connector

* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.

>   `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See

Reviewer: **Partial cleanup — Delta Lake L50 was updated but Hive (here), Iceberg L83, and Lakehouse L107 still say "now"**

The same `{{breaking}}` legacy-storage-removal bullet appears verbatim in four places (Delta Lake L47-51, Hive L61-65, Iceberg L80-84, Lakehouse L104-108). Delta Lake L50 was updated to drop "now"; the parallel three sections still read "`fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS." Same fix in three places.

```suggestion
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` applies only to HDFS. See
```

>   `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See

Reviewer: **Partial cleanup — Delta Lake L50 was updated but Hive (here), Iceberg L83, and Lakehouse L107 still say "now"**

The same `{{breaking}}` legacy-storage-removal bullet appears verbatim in four places (Delta Lake L47-51, Hive L61-65, Iceberg L80-84, Lakehouse L104-108). Delta Lake L50 was updated to drop "now"; the parallel three sections still read "`fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS." Same fix in three places.

```suggestion
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` applies only to HDFS. See
```

  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)
* Add support for [Esri GeoJSON](https://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/reference/geojson.htm). ({issue}`28859`)
* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)

> * Improve query performance when filtering on partitions with Glue. ({issue}`28818`)

Reviewer: **Vague trigger — "filtering on partitions with Glue"**

PR #28818 ("Add date partition predicate pushdown for Glue") makes a date-partition-predicate optimization specific to the Glue catalog. The current bullet does not convey the date-specific scope.

```suggestion
* Improve performance of queries with date partition predicates on Hive tables in the Glue catalog. ({issue}`28818`)
```

* Fix failure when creating tables in the Hive metastore version 3.1. ({issue}`28798`)
* Fix failure when parsing bucket numbers on tables backed by files without a bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)
* Reduce memory fragmentation and improve memory tracking for S3 file write

>   operations. ({issue}`28488`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — Improve bullet at end of section after Fixes**

L71-72 is an improvement (`Reduce memory fragmentation …`) but sits after the two fixes at L69-70. Within the section the canonical order is Add → Behaviour change → Improve → Fix; this Improve should come before the fixes. Suggest moving it to immediately after L68 (the other improvement in this section).

>   operations. ({issue}`28488`)

Reviewer: **Partial cleanup — Delta Lake L53 was updated but Hive (here), Iceberg L98-99, and Lakehouse L110-111 still say "Reduce memory fragmentation and improve memory tracking"**

Delta Lake L53 was reworded to the simpler "Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3"; the parallel bullets in Hive, Iceberg, and Lakehouse still carry the longer wording with the implementation-detail "memory fragmentation" framing. Same fix in three places.

```suggestion
* Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3. ({issue}`28488`)
```

* Add support for refreshable vended credentials for the Iceberg REST catalog (S3, GCS, Azure). ({issue}`28998`)
* Reduce memory fragmentation and improve memory tracking for S3 file write
  operations. ({issue}`28488`)
* Fix failure when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries` metadata tables. ({issue}`29211`)

## Lakehouse connector

* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See
  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)
* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)
* Reduce memory fragmentation and improve memory tracking for S3 file write
  operations. ({issue}`28488`)

## MongoDB connector

* Fix incorrect result when reading JSON column and document contains numbers

>   with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix incorrect results when reading a JSON column where the document contains numbers
  with more than 16 significant digits in the decimal portion. ({issue}`28867`)
```

Reviewer 2: (and others)

>   with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

Reviewer: **Clunky wording — applies also to MySQL L120-121, Pinot L125-126, PostgreSQL L132-133, SingleStore L137-138**

The General version of this fix (L25) was reworded to plural ("Fix incorrect results …") and reads more naturally; the connector copies still read "Fix incorrect result … and document contains numbers with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits", which is awkward grammar. The same wording is used in all five connector sections — single fix covers them.

```suggestion
* Fix incorrect results when reading JSON columns containing numbers with more than 16 significant digits in the decimal portion. ({issue}`28867`)
```

# Release 481 (dd MMM 2026)

## General

* Support casting `BOOLEAN` to `NUMBER`. ({issue}`28879`)

> * Add support to `NUMBER` type in Python UDF ({issue}`28921`)

Reviewer 3: nit: please end the sentence with a period

# Release 481 (dd MMM 2026)

## General

* Support casting `BOOLEAN` to `NUMBER`. ({issue}`28879`)
* Add support to `NUMBER` type in Python UDF. ({issue}`28921`)

> * Support cast from/to `NUMBER` and `JSON`. ({issue}`28394`)

Reviewer 3: Support cast between `NUMBER` and `JSON` seems better

> # Release 481 (dd MMM 2026)

Reviewer: **Date placeholder**

The title still has the `dd MMM 2026` placeholder. Set the actual release date (format `D Mon YYYY`, day not zero-padded, three-letter month abbreviation, no comma) when finalising the release.

## General

> * Support casting `BOOLEAN` to `NUMBER`. ({issue}`28879`)

Reviewer: **Wrong opening verb; uppercase Trino types**

We don't usually start bullets with “Support” — the canonical verb form is “Add support for”. Trino types are written lowercase in backticks.

```suggestion
* Add support for casting `boolean` to `number`. ({issue}`28879`)
```

> * Add support to `NUMBER` type in Python UDF. ({issue}`28921`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — Wrong preposition; uppercase type**

“Add support to” should be “Add support for”. Type lowercase.

_Rule:_ Canonical phrasing; type case.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `number` type in Python UDFs. ({issue}`28921`)
```

> * Add support to `NUMBER` type in Python UDF. ({issue}`28921`)

Reviewer: **Wrong preposition; uppercase type**

“Add support to” reads slightly awkwardly — the canonical phrasing is “Add support for”. Trino types are lowercase in backticks.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `number` type in Python UDFs. ({issue}`28921`)
```

> * Support cast between `NUMBER` and `JSON`. ({issue}`28394`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — Wrong opening verb; uppercase types**

“Support” → “Add support for”. Trino types lowercase.

_Rule:_ Verb gate; type case.

```suggestion
* Add support for casting between `number` and `json`. ({issue}`28394`)
```

> * Support cast between `NUMBER` and `JSON`. ({issue}`28394`)

Reviewer: **Wrong opening verb; uppercase types**

Same as above — “Support” → “Add support for”, types lowercase in backticks.

```suggestion
* Add support for casting between `number` and `json`. ({issue}`28394`)
```

> * Evaluate {func}`json_value` and {func}`json_table` `ON EMPTY`/`ON ERROR` clauses lazily. ({issue}`28969`)

Reviewer: **Should-fix — Verb gate; missing user-visible benefit**

“Evaluate” isn't a sanctioned verb; the user-visible benefit (faster execution? avoided side effects?) isn't stated.

_Rule:_ Verb gate.

```suggestion
* Improve performance of `{func}`json_value`` and `{func}`json_table`` by evaluating `ON EMPTY` and `ON ERROR` clauses lazily. ({issue}`28969`)
```

> * Evaluate {func}`json_value` and {func}`json_table` `ON EMPTY`/`ON ERROR` clauses lazily. ({issue}`28969`)

Reviewer: **Verb gate; missing user-visible benefit**

“Evaluate” isn't a verb we typically use to lead a release-notes bullet, and the user-visible benefit (faster execution? avoided side effects?) isn't called out.

```suggestion
* Improve performance of `{func}`json_value`` and `{func}`json_table`` by evaluating `ON EMPTY` and `ON ERROR` clauses lazily. ({issue}`28969`)
```

Author: The suggested code format of functions is wrong. Also, it should be ref instead of func in this case.

* Add support for `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with inline queries, allowing direct description
  of query results without requiring a `PREPARE` statement. For example,
  `DESCRIBE OUTPUT (SELECT * FROM nation)`. ({issue}`28002`)

> * Add support for the `NEAREST` clause to support approximate matches in a join. ({issue}`21759`)

Reviewer: **Should-fix — Word repetition**

“support … support” reads awkwardly; “a join” → “joins” reads better.

_Rule:_ Style.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `NEAREST` clause for approximate matches in joins. ({issue}`21759`)
```

> * Add support for the `NEAREST` clause to support approximate matches in a join. ({issue}`21759`)

Reviewer: **Word repetition**

“support … support” reads awkwardly; “in a join” → “in joins” reads more naturally.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `NEAREST` clause for approximate matches in joins. ({issue}`21759`)
```

> * Add support for binding parameters in `WITH SESSION`, `SET SESSION`, `CALL` statements ({issue}`29053`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — Missing period before issue tag**

Bullet sentence must end with a period before `({issue}`...`)`.

_Rule:_ Bullet anatomy.

```suggestion
* Add support for binding parameters in `WITH SESSION`, `SET SESSION`, and `CALL` statements. ({issue}`29053`)
```

> * Add support for binding parameters in `WITH SESSION`, `SET SESSION`, `CALL` statements ({issue}`29053`)

Reviewer: **Missing period before issue tag**

Bullets end with a period before the `({issue}`...`)` tag.

```suggestion
* Add support for binding parameters in `WITH SESSION`, `SET SESSION`, and `CALL` statements. ({issue}`29053`)
```

> * Allow to store `externalAuthenticationToken` in SYSTEM Cache. ({issue}`28783`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — Wrong section; ungrammatical; user-visible feature obscured**

PR #28783 adds a `SYSTEM` value to the `externalAuthenticationTokenCache` JDBC property that persists tokens to `~/.trino/` so they can be reused across separate JDBC client processes. The bullet exposes a Java field name, miscapitalises “SYSTEM Cache”, and lives in General — but the change is purely client-side. **Move out of General into the JDBC driver section** (and possibly CLI, since the CLI uses the same client library).

_Rule:_ Verb gate; user-visible framing; section placement.

```suggestion
* Add support for persisting external authentication tokens to disk (in `~/.trino/`), allowing reuse across separate JDBC client processes. Set `externalAuthenticationTokenCache=SYSTEM` to enable. ({issue}`28783`)
```

> * Allow to store `externalAuthenticationToken` in SYSTEM Cache. ({issue}`28783`)

Reviewer: **Wrong section; ungrammatical; user-visible feature obscured**

PR #28783 adds a `SYSTEM` value for the `externalAuthenticationTokenCache` JDBC property that persists tokens to `~/.trino/` so they can be reused across separate JDBC client processes. The current bullet exposes a Java field name, miscapitalises “SYSTEM Cache”, and lives in General — but the change is purely client-side. Worth moving out of General into the **JDBC driver** section (and possibly **CLI**, since the CLI uses the same client library).

```suggestion
* Add support for persisting external authentication tokens to disk (in `~/.trino/`), allowing reuse across separate JDBC client processes. Set `externalAuthenticationTokenCache=SYSTEM` to enable. ({issue}`28783`)
```

> * Add "CPU and scheduled time usage over time" metric to the operator stats. ({issue}`29016`)

Reviewer: **Should-fix — Internal terminology**

“operator stats” is engine-internal vocabulary. Where is this metric visible to users? (`EXPLAIN ANALYZE`? Web UI? Event listener?)

_Rule:_ Banned vocabulary; user-visible framing.

Once the surface is confirmed, prefer e.g. `* Add CPU and scheduled time usage timeseries to \`EXPLAIN ANALYZE\` output. ({issue}\`29016\`)`

> * Add "CPU and scheduled time usage over time" metric to the operator stats. ({issue}`29016`)

Reviewer: **Internal terminology**

“operator stats” is engine-internal terminology — where is this metric visible to users? (`EXPLAIN ANALYZE`? Web UI? Event listener?) Once the surface is confirmed, prefer a phrasing like `* Add CPU and scheduled time usage timeseries to \`EXPLAIN ANALYZE\` output. ({issue}\`29016\`)`

> * Include connector split source metrics in 
>   `io.trino.spi.eventlistener.QueryInputMetadata#connectorMetrics`. ({issue}`28870`)

Reviewer: **SPI change in the wrong section**

This adds a field to a class in `io.trino.spi.eventlistener`, so it's an SPI change — worth moving to the SPI section.

```suggestion
* Add connector split source metrics to `QueryInputMetadata.connectorMetrics`. ({issue}`28870`)
```

* Replace ESRI geometry library with JTS for improved ecosystem compatibility.

>   ({issue}`27881`)

Reviewer: **Should-fix — Implementation detail; capitalization**

“ESRI” → “Esri”. The library swap is implementation detail; the user-observable parts are the WKT strictness change (L20-21) and the `ST_Union` semantics change (L25-27). Consider dropping this bullet entirely (see Suggestions in the top-level review).

_Rule:_ Banned vocabulary (proper-noun casing); implementation detail.

```suggestion
* Replace the Esri geometry library with JTS to improve interoperability with the broader spatial ecosystem. ({issue}`27881`)
```

>   ({issue}`27881`)

Reviewer: **Implementation detail; capitalisation**

“ESRI” → “Esri” (proper-noun casing). The library swap is implementation detail; the user-observable parts are the WKT strictness change at L20-21 and the `ST_Union` semantics change at L25-27. You may want to drop this bullet entirely.

```suggestion
* Replace the Esri geometry library with JTS to improve interoperability with the broader spatial ecosystem. ({issue}`27881`)
```

* Make WKT parsing stricter per OGC standards and rejects previously accepted

>   invalid syntax. ({issue}`27881`)

Reviewer: **Verb-form mismatch; missing `{{breaking}}`**

“Make … and rejects” doesn't agree on verb form. More importantly: confirmed via PR #27881 that WKT input the ESRI library accepted is now rejected by JTS, which is a user-visible behaviour change worth marking `{{breaking}}`.

```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Reject WKT input that does not conform to OGC standards. Some inputs that were silently accepted before will now fail. ({issue}`27881`)
```

* Improve compatibility of filesystem exchange with Azure when container has

>   Hierarchical Name Spaces enabled. ({issue}`29042`)

Reviewer: **Capitalisation; “filesystem”**

Azure spells it “hierarchical namespace” (lowercase, one word). “filesystem” → “file system” (two words) is the form we've used in user-facing prose since around release 440.

```suggestion
* Improve compatibility of file system exchange with Azure containers that have hierarchical namespaces enabled. ({issue}`29042`)
```

> * Improve performance of simple `AND` and `OR` filters with highly selective terms. ({issue}`24336`)

Reviewer: **“filters” jargon**

“filters” is engine-internal vocabulary; users write predicates.

```suggestion
* Improve performance of queries with simple `AND` and `OR` predicates that have highly selective terms. ({issue}`24336`)
```

* Fix `ST_Union` edge case changes: empty inputs return empty geometry collection
  instead of null, and point-on-line unions no longer insert vertices at

>   intersection points. ({issue}`27881`)

Reviewer: **Missing `{{breaking}}`; phrasing; better as two bullets**

Two distinct user-observable semantics changes here: `NULL` → empty geometry collection, and the no-vertex-insertion change. Both qualify as breaking. Also, the verb is “Fix” but the bullet describes the new behaviour, not a fix.

```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Change `{func}`ST_Union`` to return an empty geometry collection instead of `NULL` for empty inputs. ({issue}`27881`)
* {{breaking}} Stop inserting vertices at intersection points for point-on-line unions in `{func}`ST_Union``. ({issue}`27881`)
```

> * Prevent `DROP CATALOG` failure when catalog is not functioning properly. ({issue}`28894`)

Reviewer: **Wrong issue ref AND wrong framing**

`28894` is *this* release-notes PR (a self-reference). The actual fix is PR #28019 (“Fix race conditions around Dynamic Catalog pruning”), which closes issue #28017 (“System metadata query failure while dynamic catalog is dropped”). The phrasing “when catalog is not functioning properly” is also misleading — the bug is about race conditions when dynamic catalogs are dropped concurrently with `system.jdbc`/`system.metadata` queries or in-flight transactions.

```suggestion
* Fix query failures and transaction errors caused by race conditions when dynamic catalogs are dropped concurrently with `system.jdbc` or `system.metadata` queries. ({issue}`28017`)
```

> * Prevent `DROP CATALOG` failure when catalog is not functioning properly. ({issue}`28894`)

Reviewer: **Wrong issue ref AND wrong framing**

`28894` is *this* release-notes PR (a self-reference). The actual fix is PR #28019 (“Fix race conditions around Dynamic Catalog pruning”), which closes issue #28017 (“System metadata query failure while dynamic catalog is dropped”). The phrasing “when catalog is not functioning properly” is also misleading — the bug is about race conditions when dynamic catalogs are dropped concurrently with `system.jdbc`/`system.metadata` queries or in-flight transactions.

```suggestion
* Fix query failures and transaction errors caused by race conditions when dynamic catalogs are dropped concurrently with `system.jdbc` or `system.metadata` queries. ({issue}`28017`)
```

* Fix incorrect result when using `json_parse` or JSON type constructor

>   and document contains numbers with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

Reviewer: **Singular vs plural; “JSON type constructor”**

We usually write “Fix incorrect results” (plural). “JSON type constructor” is unclear — likely means `JSON 'value'` literals. Note this fix is engine-level (`json_parse`/JSON literals) and is distinct from the per-connector JSON-column-read fixes in the connector sections — both are appropriate.

```suggestion
* Fix incorrect results when using `{func}`json_parse`` or `JSON` type literals on documents containing numbers with more than 16 significant digits in the decimal portion. ({issue}`28867`)
```

> * Fix failure when executing table procedures on tables with uppercase column names. ({issue}`28970`)

Reviewer: **Cross-section duplicate — pick one home**

This same bullet appears in five places: General (here), Delta Lake (L78), Hive (L109), Iceberg (L145), and Lakehouse (L167). PR #28972 confirms it's a single fix that touches all four connectors with table procedures. Worth keeping in **General only** OR in the four connector sections — not both. (Past releases tend to prefer per-connector when the fix is connector-specific code; here the fix is in shared engine code that the connectors delegate to, so General is probably the right home.)

* Fix failure when executing `ALTER TABLE EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` with OR predicates

>   on partitioned timestamp with time zone columns. ({issue}`27136`)

Reviewer: **Missing backticks**

`OR` and `timestamp with time zone` should be backticked.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when executing `ALTER TABLE EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` with `OR` predicates on partitioned `timestamp with time zone` columns. ({issue}`27136`)
```

> * Fix stale materialized views when the definition contains non-deterministic functions. ({issue}`28682`)

Reviewer: **Ambiguous symptom**

“Fix stale materialized views” reads like the verb is acting on staleness. The actual fix is about correctly *detecting* staleness when non-deterministic functions are involved.

```suggestion
* Fix incorrect freshness check for materialized views whose definition contains non-deterministic functions. ({issue}`28682`)
```

> * Fix stale materialized views when the definition contains non-deterministic functions. ({issue}`28682`)

Reviewer: **Ambiguous symptom**

“Fix stale materialized views” reads like the verb is acting on staleness. The actual fix is about correctly *detecting* staleness when non-deterministic functions are involved.

```suggestion
* Fix incorrect freshness check for materialized views whose definition contains non-deterministic functions. ({issue}`28682`)
```

> * Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with versioned tables. ({issue}`29077`)

Reviewer: **Vague qualifier “versioned tables”**

“versioned tables” isn't a Trino concept users will recognise — the SQL surface is `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF`.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF` clauses. ({issue}`29077`)
```

> * Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with versioned tables. ({issue}`29077`)

Reviewer: **Vague qualifier “versioned tables”**

“versioned tables” isn't a Trino concept users will recognise — the SQL surface is `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF`.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF` clauses. ({issue}`29077`)
```

> * Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with versioned tables. ({issue}`29077`)

Reviewer: **Vague qualifier “versioned tables”**

“versioned tables” isn't a Trino concept users will recognise — the SQL surface is `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF`.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when executing `DESCRIBE OUTPUT` with `[VERSION | TIMESTAMP] AS OF` clauses. ({issue}`29077`)
```

> * Fix failure when using geometry types. ({issue}`29093`)

Reviewer: **Drop this entry**

PR #29096 fixes a `BootstrapMethodError` regression that broke `ST_POINT` and other geometry constructors after the JTS migration in this same release (481-SNAPSHOT). It is a fix for code that hasn't yet been released — the JTS migration ships in 481, and so does this fix. We don't usually release-note fixes for bugs in unreleased code.

**Recommend deleting this line.** Users of 481 never see the regression.

> * Fix failure when using geometry types. ({issue}`29093`)

Reviewer: **Drop this entry**

PR #29096 fixes a `BootstrapMethodError` regression that broke `ST_POINT` and other geometry constructors after the JTS migration in this same release (481-SNAPSHOT). It is a fix for code that hasn't yet been released — the JTS migration ships in 481, and so does this fix. We don't usually release-note fixes for bugs in unreleased code.

**Recommend deleting this line.** Users of 481 never see the regression.

* Fix suboptimal join ordering that could cause excessive memory usage for

>   queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)

Reviewer: **Front-load the user-visible symptom**

“suboptimal join ordering” is the cause; the user-visible symptom is excessive memory usage.

```suggestion
* Reduce excessive memory usage caused by suboptimal join ordering for queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)
```

>   queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)

Reviewer: **Front-load the user-visible symptom**

“suboptimal join ordering” is the cause; the user-visible symptom is excessive memory usage.

```suggestion
* Reduce excessive memory usage caused by suboptimal join ordering for queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)
```

>   queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)

Reviewer: **Front-load the user-visible symptom**

“suboptimal join ordering” is the cause; the user-visible symptom is excessive memory usage.

```suggestion
* Reduce excessive memory usage caused by suboptimal join ordering for queries on columns with unknown statistics. ({issue}`29157`)
```

## Security

## Web UI

## JDBC driver

> * Add support for VARIANT type. ({issue}`29046`)

Reviewer: **Type case**

Trino types are lowercase in backticks.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `variant` type. ({issue}`29046`)
```

## Docker image

## CLI

> * Add support for VARIANT type. ({issue}`29046`)

Reviewer: **Type case**

Trino types are lowercase in backticks.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `variant` type. ({issue}`29046`)
```

## BigQuery connector

## Blackhole connector

## Cassandra connector

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for reading all ClickHouse `DECIMAL` columns. ({issue}`28873`)

## Delta Lake connector

> * {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
>   Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
>   systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
>   `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See
>   [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)

Reviewer: **“now” usage — applies also to the parallel bullets at L98-102, L125-129, L159-163**

We don't usually use “now” in release notes — the bullet's existence already implies the behaviour is new. Same wording appears in all four legacy-storage-removal bullets.

```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` applies only to HDFS. See
  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)
```

> * {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
>   Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
>   systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
>   `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See
>   [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)

Reviewer: **“now” usage — applies also to the parallel bullets at L98-102, L125-129, L159-163**

We don't usually use “now” in release notes — the bullet's existence already implies the behaviour is new. Same wording appears in all four legacy-storage-removal bullets.

```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` applies only to HDFS. See
  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)
```

> * Add `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` config properties. ({issue}`29284`)

Reviewer: **Lead with feature, not property name (also at L104, L117, L141, L164)**

We usually describe what a new property lets users do, then mention the property name. Leading with the bare property name reads like an internal changelog entry.

```suggestion
* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)
```

> * Add `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` config properties. ({issue}`29284`)

Reviewer: **Lead with feature, not property name (also at L104, L117, L141, L164)**

We usually describe what a new property lets users do, then mention the property name. Leading with the bare property name reads like an internal changelog entry.

```suggestion
* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)
```

> * Add `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` config properties. ({issue}`29284`)

Reviewer: **Lead with feature, not property name (also at L104, L117, L141, L164)**

We usually describe what a new property lets users do, then mention the property name. Leading with the bare property name reads like an internal changelog entry.

```suggestion
* Add support for configuring the Azure connection-pool idle time and HTTP request timeout via the `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` configuration properties. ({issue}`29284`)
```

* Reduce memory fragmentation and improve memory tracking for S3 file write

>   operations. ({issue}`28488`)

Reviewer: **Should-fix — Two changes; implementation-detail term (applies also to the copies at L107-108, L143-144, L165-166)**

Mixes two effects. “memory fragmentation” is borderline implementation-detail; users observe reduced peak memory.

_Rule:_ Symptom-and-trigger framing.

```suggestion
* Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3. ({issue}`28488`)
```

>   operations. ({issue}`28488`)

Reviewer: **Two changes; implementation-detail term (also at L107-108, L143-144, L165-166)**

This bullet mixes two effects, and “memory fragmentation” is closer to implementation detail than user-observable. Users typically see reduced peak memory.

```suggestion
* Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3. ({issue}`28488`)
```

>   operations. ({issue}`28488`)

Reviewer: **Two changes; implementation-detail term (also at L107-108, L143-144, L165-166)**

This bullet mixes two effects, and “memory fragmentation” is closer to implementation detail than user-observable. Users typically see reduced peak memory.

```suggestion
* Reduce memory usage when writing files to S3. ({issue}`28488`)
```

* Improve query planning latency by reading metadata and protocol information from Delta checksum files. 
  Can be disabled via the `delta.load-metadata-from-checksum-file` configuration property or

>   `load_metadata_from_checksum_file` session property. ({issue}`28381`)

Reviewer: **“latency” → “time”**

Convention across past releases is “Reduce planning time”, not “Improve query planning latency”.

```suggestion
* Reduce query planning time by reading metadata and protocol information from Delta checksum files.
  This optimization can be disabled by setting the `delta.load-metadata-from-checksum-file` configuration property or
  `load_metadata_from_checksum_file` session property to `false`. ({issue}`28381`)
```

>   `load_metadata_from_checksum_file` session property. ({issue}`28381`)

Reviewer: **“latency” → “time”**

Convention across past releases is “Reduce planning time”, not “Improve query planning latency”.

```suggestion
* Reduce query planning time by reading metadata and protocol information from Delta checksum files.
  This optimization can be disabled by setting the `delta.load-metadata-from-checksum-file` configuration property or
  `load_metadata_from_checksum_file` session property to `false`. ({issue}`28381`)
```

> * Fix incorrect results when deleting rows. ({issue}`28885`)

Reviewer: **No trigger condition**

PR #28907 (the actual fix) and issue #28885 reveal the trigger: `DELETE` on Delta Lake tables backed by Parquet files with **column-index pages**, particularly when the table was written by Apache Spark. The current bullet doesn't say enough for a user to recognise whether they were affected.

```suggestion
* Fix `DELETE` deleting incorrect rows on Delta Lake tables backed by Parquet files with column indexes, particularly when the table was written by Apache Spark. ({issue}`28885`)
```

* Fix failure when executing table procedures on tables with uppercase column names. ({issue}`28970`)
* Rename property `fs.native-azure.enabled` to `fs.azure.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-gcs.enabled` to `fs.gcs.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-s3.enabled` to `fs.s3.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)

> * Rename property `fs.native-local.enabled` to `fs.local.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)

Reviewer: **Drop these rename entries — `@LegacyConfig` aliases are wired**

I checked `lib/trino-filesystem-manager/src/main/java/io/trino/filesystem/manager/FileSystemConfig.java` in PR #29070: each of the four `@Config("fs.X.enabled")` setters carries a matching `@LegacyConfig("fs.native-X.enabled")` alias. The old property names still work and produce a startup warning, which is the project's notice mechanism for soft-deprecated properties — release notes for the rename are unnecessary and inconsistent with how we've handled similar renames.

**Recommend deleting all four `Rename property fs.native-*.enabled to fs.*.enabled` bullets in this section.** The same recommendation applies to the parallel rename blocks at L110-113 (Hive), L118-121 (Hudi), L146-149 (Iceberg), and L168-171 (Lakehouse) — 20 bullets to remove in total.

## Druid connector

## DuckDB connector

## Elasticsearch connector

## Exasol connector

## Faker connector

## Google Sheets connector

## Hive connector

* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See
  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)

> * Add support for [Esri GeoJson](https://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/reference/geojson.htm). ({issue}`28859`)

Reviewer: **Capitalisation**

GeoJSON is uppercase per the spec and the linked Esri page.

```suggestion
* Add support for [Esri GeoJSON](https://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/reference/geojson.htm). ({issue}`28859`)
```

> * Add support for [Esri GeoJson](https://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/reference/geojson.htm). ({issue}`28859`)

Reviewer: **Capitalisation**

GeoJSON is uppercase per the spec and the linked Esri page.

```suggestion
* Add support for [Esri GeoJSON](https://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/reference/geojson.htm). ({issue}`28859`)
```

* Add `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` config properties. ({issue}`29284`)

> * Fix failure when creating tables in HMS for Apache Hive 3.1. ({issue}`28798`)

Reviewer: **Abbreviation**

Past releases spell out “Hive metastore” rather than “HMS”.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when creating tables in the Hive metastore version 3.1. ({issue}`28798`)
```

> * Fix failure when creating tables in HMS for Apache Hive 3.1. ({issue}`28798`)

Reviewer: **Abbreviation**

Past releases spell out “Hive metastore” rather than “HMS”.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when creating tables in the Hive metastore version 3.1. ({issue}`28798`)
```

> * Fix failure when parsing bucket number on table backed by files without bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)

Reviewer: **Article and plural**

Missing article; “table” reads better as “tables”.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when parsing bucket numbers on tables backed by files without a bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)
```

> * Fix failure when parsing bucket number on table backed by files without bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)

Reviewer: **Article and plural**

Missing article; “table” reads better as “tables”.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when parsing bucket numbers on tables backed by files without a bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)
```

> * Fix failure when parsing bucket number on table backed by files without bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)

Reviewer: **Article and plural**

Missing article; “table” reads better as “tables”.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when parsing bucket numbers on tables backed by files without a bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)
```

> * Fix failure when parsing bucket number on table backed by files without bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)

Reviewer: **Article and plural**

Missing article; “table” reads better as “tables”.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when parsing bucket numbers on tables backed by files without a bucket name. ({issue}`28632`)
```

* Rename property `fs.native-azure.enabled` to `fs.azure.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-gcs.enabled` to `fs.gcs.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-s3.enabled` to `fs.s3.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-local.enabled` to `fs.local.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)

## Hudi connector

* Add `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` config properties. ({issue}`29284`)
* Rename property `fs.native-azure.enabled` to `fs.azure.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-gcs.enabled` to `fs.gcs.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-s3.enabled` to `fs.s3.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)
* Rename property `fs.native-local.enabled` to `fs.local.enabled`. ({issue}`29070`)

## Iceberg connector

* {{breaking}} Remove legacy object storage support for Azure Storage,
  Google Cloud Storage, IBM Cloud Object Storage, S3, and S3-compatible
  systems. Use native file system support for object storage.
  `fs.hadoop.enabled` now applies only to HDFS. See
  [legacy file system support](file-system-legacy) for migration details. ({issue}`24878`)

> * Fix `NullPointerException` when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries`. ({issue}`29211`)

Reviewer: **Suggestion — Move this Fix to the end of the Iceberg section**

Within a section, the order is Add → Improve → Behavior change → Fix. This Fix sits between the breaking removal and the Add bullets that follow. Move it to the end alongside the other Fix at L145 (`Fix failure when executing table procedures …`).

_Rule:_ Sort order.

_No suggestion — this is a re-ordering note for the file as a whole._

> * Fix `NullPointerException` when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries`. ({issue}`29211`)

Reviewer: **Suggestion — Move this Fix to the end of the Iceberg section**

Within a section, the order is Add → Improve → Behavior change → Fix. This Fix sits between the breaking removal and the Add bullets that follow. Move it to the end alongside the other Fix at L145 (`Fix failure when executing table procedures …`).

_Rule:_ Sort order.

_No suggestion — this is a re-ordering note for the file as a whole._

> * Fix `NullPointerException` when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries`. ({issue}`29211`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — move this Fix to the end of the Iceberg section**

Within a section, the order is Add → Improve → Behaviour change → Fix. This Fix sits between the breaking removal at the top and the Add bullets that follow. Worth moving to the end alongside the other Fix at L145 (`Fix failure when executing table procedures …`).

> * Fix `NullPointerException` when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries`. ({issue}`29211`)

Reviewer: **Internal Java exception name; metadata tables plural**

We don't usually surface internal Java exception types like `NullPointerException` in release notes — readers can't tell what they did to trigger it. Also, `$entries` and `$all_entries` are tables (one per Iceberg table), so plural reads better.

```suggestion
* Fix failure when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries` metadata tables. ({issue}`29211`)
```

> * Fix `NullPointerException` when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries`. ({issue}`29211`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — move this Fix to the end of the Iceberg section**

Within a section, the order is Add → Improve → Behaviour change → Fix. This Fix sits between the breaking removal at the top and the Add bullets that follow. Worth moving to the end alongside the other Fix at L145 (`Fix failure when executing table procedures …`).

> * Fix `NullPointerException` when reading the `$entries` or `$all_entries`. ({issue}`29211`)

Reviewer: **Sort order — move this Fix to the end of the Iceberg section**

Within a section, the order is Add → Improve → Behaviour change → Fix. This Fix sits between the breaking removal at the top and the Add bullets that follow. Worth moving to the end alongside the other Fix at L145 (`Fix failure when executing table procedures …`).

* Add experimental support for the `variant` type for Iceberg v3 tables.
  Older CLI versions will render the value as JSON unless updated. ({issue}`24538`)
* Add support for reading and writing `timestamp(9)` and
  `timestamp(9) with time zone` in Iceberg v3 tables. ({issue}`27835`)
* Add support for Azure vended credentials in Iceberg REST catalog. ({issue}`23238`)
* Add support for specifying HTTP headers in REST catalog. ({issue}`24236`)
* Add support for execution metrics while running the `add_files` and `add_files_from_table`
  procedures. ({issue}`28996`)
* Add support for execution metrics while running the `optimize` procedure. ({issue}`28992`)
* Add more columns to `$files` system table. ({issue}`29044`)
* Add `azure.connection-pool-max-idle-time` and `azure.http-request-timeout` config properties. ({issue}`29284`)

> * Add support for refreshable vended credentials for Iceberg REST catalog (S3, GCS, Azure). ({issue}`28998 `)

Reviewer: **Malformed issue ref (trailing space); article**

Trailing space inside the backticks: `28998 ` rather than `28998`. Also adds “the” for consistency with how the Iceberg REST catalog is referred to elsewhere.

```suggestion
* Add support for refreshable vended credentials for the Iceberg REST catalog (S3, GCS, Azure). ({issue}`28998`)
```

## MongoDB connector

* Fix incorrect result when reading JSON column and document contains numbers
  with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

## MySQL connector

* Fix incorrect result when reading JSON column and document contains numbers
  with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

## OpenSearch connector

## Oracle connector

## Pinot connector

* Fix incorrect result when reading JSON column and document contains numbers
  with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Improve performance of queries involving `COALESCE` by pushing expression
  computation to the underlying database. ({issue}`11535`)
* Fix incorrect result when reading JSON column and document contains numbers
  with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

## Prometheus connector

## Redis connector

## Redshift connector

## SingleStore connector

* Fix incorrect result when reading JSON column and document contains numbers
  with decimal point with more than 16 significant digits. ({issue}`28867`)

## Snowflake connector

## SQL Server connector

> * Add support for JSON type. ({issue}`28082`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — Type case**

Trino type lowercase, backticked.

_Rule:_ Casing.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `json` type. ({issue}`28082`)
```

> * Add support for JSON type. ({issue}`28082`)

Reviewer: **Type case**

Trino types are lowercase in backticks.

```suggestion
* Add support for the `json` type. ({issue}`28082`)
```

* Fix permission denied failure when reading tables. ({issue}`29244`)

## TPC-H connector

## TPC-DS connector

## SPI

* Add `variant` type defined by the Iceberg specification. ({issue}`24538`)

> * Add table branch name parameter to access control functions. ({issue}`29179`)

Reviewer: **SPI methods unspecified**

“access control functions” is too vague for the SPI section — plugin authors can't tell which methods to update. Worth naming them.

```suggestion
* Add a `tableBranch` parameter to the `ConnectorAccessControl.checkCanXxx` table-level methods. ({issue}`29179`)
```

> * Add table branch name parameter to access control functions. ({issue}`29179`)

Reviewer: **SPI methods unspecified**

“access control functions” is too vague for the SPI section — plugin authors can't tell which methods to update. Worth naming them.

```suggestion
* Add a `tableBranch` parameter to the `ConnectorAccessControl.checkCanXxx` table-level methods. ({issue}`29179`)
```

> * Add table branch name parameter to access control functions. ({issue}`29179`)

Reviewer: **SPI methods unspecified**

“access control functions” is too vague for the SPI section — plugin authors can't tell which methods to update. Worth naming them.

```suggestion
* Add a `tableBranch` parameter to the `ConnectorAccessControl.checkCanXxx` table-level methods. ({issue}`29179`)
```

> * Coalesce expressions are now available for pushdown. ({issue}`28984`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — “now” + passive voice**

“now” is banned. Passive voice. Should describe what plugin authors can now do.

_Rule:_ Banned vocabulary; verb gate.

```suggestion
* Add support for pushing down `COALESCE` expressions in connectors. ({issue}`28984`)
```

> * Coalesce expressions are now available for pushdown. ({issue}`28984`)

Reviewer: **“now” + passive voice**

We don't usually use “now” in release notes (the bullet's existence already implies it's new). Passive voice also tends to obscure who can do what — better to describe what plugin authors can do.

```suggestion
* Add support for pushing down `COALESCE` expressions in connectors. ({issue}`28984`)
```

> * Remove the deprecated `getObject` and `appendTo` methods from `Type` class. ({issue}`29003`)

Reviewer: **Must-fix — Missing `{{breaking}}` on SPI removal**

SPI method removal is breaking — plugins implementing these must update.

_Rule:_ Breaking-change category 4 (SPI non-back-compat).

```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Remove the deprecated `getObject` and `appendTo` methods from the `Type` interface. ({issue}`29003`)
```

> * Remove the deprecated `getObject` and `appendTo` methods from `Type` class. ({issue}`29003`)

Reviewer: **Missing `{{breaking}}` on SPI removal; article**

Removing SPI methods is breaking — plugins implementing them have to update.

```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Remove the deprecated `getObject` and `appendTo` methods from the `Type` interface. ({issue}`29003`)
```
